This repository contains code for generating the plots in the following paper: 

# Title: Comparative morphometric analyses of the deciduous teeth of Homo naledi
# Authors: Brophy, J.K., Moggi-Cecchi, J., Matthews, G.J., Bailey, S.E.

# Abstract
Fossil teeth play an important role in diagnosing and examining taxonomic differences in hominin species and factor strongly in discussions on the origins of the genus Homo. Less attention has been paid to deciduous teeth despite the fact that they are considered more conservative in their morphology compared to their permanent counterparts. In addition, morphometrics has proven to be useful in assessing interspecific variation in hominin teeth. This study provides morphometric analyses of Homo naledi deciduous teeth from the Dinaledi Chamber, Gauteng Province, South Africa. The morphometrics include crown shape and relative cusp analyses (RCA) of the maxillary and mandibular deciduous molars. The Dinaledi fossils were compared with deciduous molar teeth from hominins classified as Australopithecus africanus, A. afarensis, A. sediba, Paranthropus robustus, P. boisei, Homo sp., H. erectus, early H. sapiens, Upper Paleolithic H. sapiens, recent H. sapiens, and Neanderthals using elliptical fourier analysis. The principal component analysis (PCA) suggests that the mandibular teeth are more diagnostic than the maxillary teeth. The dm1 and dm2 crown outlines do not overlap with any species in the sample. A RCA was performed on the dm2 and dm2. The PCA of the relative cusp scores for dm2 discriminate well between Neanderthals and recent H. sapiens and UP H. sapiens but does not differentiate well between the other groups. The three H. naledi dm2 exhibit a wide range of variation overlapping with both Homo and australopiths suggesting these teeth share cuspal proportions with both of those genera. While the dm2 teeth tend to separate well from each other on a generic level, the H. naledi specimens fall closest to australopiths due to their large metaconid, a primitive trait for the genus Homo. The H. naledi teeth do not consistently align with any species in the comparative sample in either the crown shape or relative cusp analyses supporting their taxonomic designation as a new species in the genus Homo. The deciduous dental sample expands our knowledge of the morphology and variation inherent in H. naledi and in the genus Homo, in general.

